1
Learning Graph Structures with Transformer for
Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection in IoT
Zekai Chen, Student Member, IEEE, Dingshuo Chen, Xiao Zhang, Member, IEEE, Zixuan Yuan,
and Xiuzhen Cheng, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Many real-world IoT systems, which include a
variety of internet-connected sensory devices, produce substantial
amounts of multivariate time series data. Meanwhile, vital IoT
infrastructures like smart power grids and water distribution net-
works are frequently targeted by cyber-attacks, making anomaly
detection an important study topic. Modeling such relatedness is,
nevertheless, unavoidable for any efﬁcient and effective anomaly
detection system, given the intricate topological and nonlinear
connections that are originally unknown among sensors. Further-
more, detecting anomalies in multivariate time series is difﬁcult
due to their temporal dependency and stochasticity. This paper
presented GTA, a new framework for multivariate time series
anomaly detection that involves automatically learning a graph
structure, graph convolution, and modeling temporal dependency
using a Transformer-based architecture. The connection learning
policy, which is based on the Gumbel-softmax sampling approach
to learn bi-directed links among sensors directly, is at the heart
of learning graph structure. To describe the anomaly information
ﬂow between network nodes, we introduced a new graph convo-
lution called Inﬂuence Propagation convolution. In addition, to
tackle the quadratic complexity barrier, we suggested a multi-
branch attention mechanism to replace the original multi-head
self-attention method. Extensive experiments on four publicly
available anomaly detection benchmarks further demonstrate
the superiority of our approach over alternative state-of-the-arts.
Codes are available at https://github.com/ZEKAICHEN/GTA.
Index Terms—Multivariate time series, anomaly detection,
graph learning, self-attention
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to the fast rising number of Internet-connected sensory
devices, the Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructure has created
vast sensory data. IoT data is often characterized by its
speed in terms of geographical and temporal dependency
[1], [2], and it is frequently subjected to correspondingly
rising abnormalities and cyberattacks [3], [4]. Many critical
infrastructures constructed on top of Cyber-Physical Systems
(CPS) [5], such as smart power grids, water treatment and
distribution networks, transportation, and autonomous cars, are
especially in need of security monitoring [6], [7], [4]. As
a result, an efﬁcient and accurate anomaly detection system
has great research value because it can help with continuous
monitoring of fundamental controls or indicators and promptly
provide notiﬁcations for any probable anomalous occurrence.
Z. Chen is with the Department of Computer Science, George Washington
University, Washington, DC, 20052 USA (email: zech chan@gwu.edu)
Z. Yuan is with the School of Business, Rutgers University, New Jersey,
08901 USA (email: zy101@rutgers.edu)
X. Zhang (corresponding author), X. Cheng and D. Chen are with School
of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, China (emails:
xiaozhang@sdu.edu.cn, xzcheng@sdu.edu.cn)
In this work, we focus on anomaly detection for multivariate
time series [8] as a copious amount of IoT sensors in many
real-life scenarios consecutively generate substantial volumes
of time series data. For instance, in a Secure Water Distribution
(WADI) system [9], multiple sensing measurements such as
ﬂowing meter, transmitting level, valve status, water pressure
level, etc., are recorded simultaneously at each timestamp to
form a multivariate time series. In this case, the central water
treatment testbed is also known as an entity. It is commonly
accepted to detect anomalies from the entity-level instead of
the sensor-level since the overall status detection is generally
worth more concern and less expensive. Predominantly, data
from these sensors are highly correlated in a complex topo-
logical and nonlinear fashion: for example, opening a valve
would result in pressure and ﬂow rate changes, leading to
further chain reactions of other sensors within the same entity
following an internal mechanism. Nevertheless, the dependen-
cies among sensors are initially hidden and somehow costly
to access in most real-life scenarios, leading to an intuitive
question of how to model such complicated relationships
between sensors without knowing prior information?
Recently, deep learning-based techniques have demonstrated
some promising improvements in anomaly detection due to
the superiority in sequence modeling over high-dimensional
datasets. Generally, the existing approaches can roughly fall
into two lines: reconstruction-based models (R-model) [10],
[11], [12], [6], [13] and forecasting-based models (F-model)
[14], [15], [8], [16], [17], [4]. For example, Auto-Encoders
(AE) [10] is a popular approach for anomaly detection, which
uses reconstruction error as an outlier score. More recently,
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [18], [19] based
on reconstruction [20], [6] and RNN-based forecasting ap-
proaches [8], [17] have also reported promising performance
for multivariate anomaly detection. However, these methods
do not explicitly learn the topological structure among sen-
sors, thus leaving room for improvements in modeling high-
dimensional sensor data with considerable potential inter-
relationships appropriately.
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [21], [22], [23],
[24] have recently revealed discriminative power in learning
graph representations due to their permutation-invariance, lo-
cal connectivity, and compositionality [21], [25]. Graph neural
networks allow each graph node to acknowledge its neigh-
borhood context by propagating information through struc-
tures. Recent works [17], [26], [4] then combined temporal
modeling methods with GCNs to model the topological rela-
tionships between sensors. Speciﬁcally, most existing graph-
arXiv:2104.03466v3  [cs.LG]  17 Jan 2022
2
based approaches [25], [4] aim to learn the graph structure
by measuring the cosine similarity (or other distance metrics)
between sensor embeddings and deﬁning top-K closest nodes
as the source node’s connections, followed by a graph attention
convolution to capture the information propagation process.
However, we argue that (1) dot products among sensor embed-
dings lead inevitably to quadratic time and space complexity
regarding the number of sensors; (2) the tightness of spatial
distance can not entirely indicate that there exists a strong
connection in a topological structure.
To address the problems above, we propose an innova-
tive framework named Graph Learning with Transformer for
Anomaly detection (GTA) in this paper. We devise from the
perspective of learning a global bi-directed graph structure
involving all sensors within the entity through a connec-
tion learning policy based on the Gumbel-Softmax Sampling
trick to overcome the quadratic complexity challenge and
the limitations of top-K nearest strategy. The policy logits
can automatically discover the hidden associations during the
training process by determining whether any speciﬁc node’s
information should ﬂow to the other targets to achieve the
best forecasting accuracy while restricting each node’s neigh-
borhoods’ scope as much as possible. The discovered hidden
associations are then fed into the graph convolution layers
for information propagation modeling. We then integrate these
graph convolution layers with different level dilated convolu-
tion layers to construct a hierarchical context encoding block
speciﬁcally for temporal data. While recurrent mechanisms can
be naturally applied to temporal dependency modeling, it is
hard to parallelize in many mobile environments (e.g., IoT),
which require high computation efﬁciency. Hence we adopt the
Transformer [27] based architecture for the sequence modeling
and forecasting due to the parallel efﬁciency and capability of
capturing long-distance context information. We also propose
a novel multi-branch attention strategy to reduce the quadratic
complexity of original self multi-head attention.
The main contributions of our work are summarized as
follows:
• We propose a novel and differentiable connection learn-
ing policy to automatically learn the graph structure of
dependency relationships between sensors. Meanwhile,
each node’s neighborhood ﬁeld is restricted by integrating
a new loss term for further inference efﬁciency.
• We introduce a novel graph convolution named Informa-
tion Propagation (IP) convolution to model the anomaly
inﬂuence ﬂowing process. A multi-scale dilated convo-
lution is then combined with the graph convolution to
form an effective hierarchical temporal context encoding
block.
• We propose a novel multi-branch attention mechanism
to tackle the original multi-head attention mechanism’s
quadratic complexity challenge.
• We conduct extensive experiments on a wide range of
multivariate time series anomaly detection benchmarks
to demonstrate the superiority of our proposed approach
over state-of-the-arts.
II. RELATED WORK
The existing literature for addressing time series anomaly
detection usually can be divided into two major categories.
The ﬁrst category usually modeled each time series variable
independently, while the second category took into considera-
tion the correlations among multivariate time series to improve
the performance.
A. Anomaly Detection in Univariate Time Series
The anomaly detection in univariate time series has drawn
many researchers’ attentions in recent years. Traditionally,
the anomaly detection frameworks included two main phases:
estimation phase and detection phase [28]. In estimation phase,
the variable values at one timestamp or time interval can
be predicted or estimated by speciﬁc algorithm. Then the
estimated values were compared with real values based on
dynamically adjusted thresholds to detect anomalies in detec-
tion phase. For example, Zhang et. al [29] applied ARIMA
to capture the linear dependencies between the future values
and the past values, thus modeling the time series behavior
for anomaly detection. Lu et.al [30] utilized wavelet analysis
to construct the estimation model. With the development of
deep learning, various neural network architectures have also
been applied to anomaly detection. DeepAnt [31] was an
unsupervised approach using convolutional neural network
(CNN) to forecast future time series values and adopted
Euclidean distance to measure the discrepancy for anomaly
detection. The LSTM neural network was also widely used
in modeling time series behaviors [32], [33], [6]. The LSTM-
based encoder-decoder [32] reconstructed the variable values
and measured the reconstruction errors for detection.
B. Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series
In real-world scenarios, the time series data acquisition
sources could be multiple [34]. Therefore, many work began
to pay attention to exploiting the correlations among multiple
variables to improve the accuracy of anomaly detection. Jones
et.al [35] extracted statistical and smoothed trajectory (SST)
features of time series and utilized a set of non-linear func-
tions to model related variables to detect anomalies. Using
the LSTM network as the base models to to capture the
temporal correlations of time series data, MAD-GAN [6]
proposed an unsupervised anomaly detection method com-
bining generative adversarial networks (GAN) by considering
complex dependencies amongst different time series variables.
Sakurada et al. [36] conducted dimentionality reduction based
on autoencoders for anomaly detection. The ODCA frame-
work [37] included three parts: data preprocessing, outlier
analysis, and outlier rank, which used cross correlation to
translate high-dimentional data sets to one-dimentional cross-
correlation function. OmniAnomaly [13] was a stochastic
model to avoid potential misguiding by uncertain instances,
which used stochastic variable connection and normalizing
ﬂow to get reconstruction probabilities and adopted stream-
ing POT with drift (DSPOT) algorithm [38] for automatic
threshold selection. Senin et al. [39] proposed two algorithms
3
Fig. 1: The visualization of our proposed GTA’s architecture with l levels dilated convolution and graph convolution, 3 encoder
layers, and 1 decoder layer. Generally, the input multivariate time series inputs are split into train sequences and label sequences,
of which train sequences are fed into encoder while label sequences are fed to the decoder.
that conducted symbolic time series discretization and used
grammar reduction to compress the input sequence and com-
pactly encode them with grammar rules. Those rarely used
substrings in the grammar rules were regarded as anomalies.
Autoregressive with exogenous inputs (ARX) and artiﬁcial
neural network (ANN) [40] extracted time-series features and
detected anomalous data points by conducting hypothesis
testing on the extrema of residuals.
To cover the shortage that the convolution and pooling
operators of CNNs are deﬁned for regular grids, recent GNN
[41] generalizes CNNs to graphs that are able to encode
irregular and non-Euclidean structures. GNN adopted the
localized spectral ﬁlters and used a graph coarsening algorithm
to cluster similar vertices for speeding up. In this way, GNN
efﬁciently extracted the local stationary property and captured
the correlation between nodes. In real-world IoT environment,
the graph structure modeling the correlations between sensors
is often not predeﬁned in advance. Graph deviation network
(GDN) [4] learned the pairwise relationship by cosine simi-
larity to elaborate adjacent matrix which can be modeled as a
graph. Then it predicted the future values by graph attention-
based forecasting and computed the absolute error value to
evaluate graph deviation score. MTAD-GAN [17] concate-
nated feature-oriented and time-oriented graph attention layer
to learn graph structure and used both forecasting-based model
and reconstruction-based model to calculate integrated loss.
Then automatic threshold algorithm was adopted to perform
anomaly detection.
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this work, we focus on the task of multivariate time
series anomaly detection. Let X (t) ∈RM denote the original
multivariate time series data at any timestamp t, where M is
the total number of sensors or any data measuring node within
the same entity. M is also reported as the number of features
or variables in some literature [6], [13], [4]. Considering
the high unbalance between normal data and anomalies, we
only construct the sequence modeling process on normal data
(without anomalies) and make prediction on testing data (with
anomalies) for anomaly detection. Speciﬁcally, we let X and
ˆ
X represent the entire normal data and data with anomalies,
respectively. For sequence modeling on normal data, we inherit
a forecasting-based strategy to predict the time series value
x(t) ∈RM at next time step t (aka. single-step time series fore-
casting) based on the historical data x = {x(t−n), · · · , x(t−1)}
with a speciﬁc window size n. Therefore, given a sequence of
historical n time steps of multivariate contiguous observations
ˆx ∈RM×n, the goal of anomaly detection is to predict the
output vector ˆy ∈Rn, where ˆy(t) ∈{0, 1} denotes binary
labels indicating whether there is an anomaly at time tick t.
Precisely, our proposed approach returns an anomaly score
for each testing timestamp, and then the anomaly result can
be obtained via selecting different thresholds.
We also provide some basic graph-related concepts for
better understanding formulated as follows:
Deﬁnition III.1 (Graph). A directed graph is formulated as
G = (V, E) where V = {1, · · · , M} is the set of nodes, and
E ⊆V × V is the set of edges, where ei,j represents the
uni-directed edge ﬂowing from node i to node j.
Deﬁnition III.2 (Node Neighborhood). Let i ∈V denote a
node and ei,j ∈E denote the edge pointing from node i to
node j. The neighborhood of any node i is deﬁned as N(i) =
{j ∈V|ei,j ∈E}.
4
Fig. 2: Suppose we have 3 sensors (N1, N2, N3) of which the
dependencies are yet hidden. Our connection learning policy’s
main idea is to use the Gumbel-Softmax Sampling strategy to
sample a random categorical vector for determining whether
any directed connection between two nodes can be established.
For N1 and N2, if the value of P1,2 is relatively high, it
represents N1 is highly possibly pointed to N2, vice versa.
IV. METHODOLOGY
In most real-life scenarios of IoT, there are usually complex
topological relationships between sensors where the entire
entity can be seen as a graph structure. Each sensor is also
viewed as a speciﬁc node in the graph. Previous methods [25],
[4] focused on applying various distance metrics to measure
the relations between nodes mostly by selecting the top-K
closest ones as their neighbor dependencies. Different from
existing approaches, we devise a directed graph structure
learning policy (see Fig. 1) to automatically learn the adja-
cency matrix among nodes such that the network can achieve
the maximum beneﬁts. The core of the learning policy is
named Gumbel-Softmax Sampling strategy [42], [43] inspired
by the policy learning network in many reinforcement learning
methods [44], [45]. These discovered hidden associations are
then fed into the graph convolution layers for information
propagation modeling. We then integrate these graph convo-
lution layers with different level dilated convolution layers
together to construct a hierarchical context encoding block
speciﬁcally for temporal data. The outputs of the context
encoding block are then applied positional encoding as the
inputs of Transformer [27] for single-step time series forecast-
ing. We also propose a global attention strategy to overcome
the quadratic computation complexity challenge of the multi-
head attention mechanism. Fig. 1 further illustrates the entire
architecture in detail.
A. Gumbel-Softmax Sampling
The sampling process of discrete data from a categori-
cal distribution is originally non-differentiable, where typical
backpropagation in deep neural networks cannot be conducted.
[42], [43] proposed a differentiable substitution of discrete
random variables in stochastic computations by introducing
Gumbel-Softmax distribution, a continuous distribution over
the simplex that can approximate samples from a categorical
distribution. In our graph learning policy with a total number
of M candidate nodes, we let zi,j be a binary connection
control variable for any pair of nodes i and j with uni-directed
probabilities from node i to node j as {πi,j
0 , πi,j
1 }, where
πi,j
0
+ πi,j
1
= 1 and πi,j
1
represents the probability that there
exists an information ﬂow from node i to node j in the graph
(see Fig. 2). Similarly, by Gumbel-Max trick, we can sample
any pair of nodes’ connection strategy zi,j ∈{0, 1}2 with:
zi,j = arg max
c∈{0,1}
(log πi,j
c
+ gi,j
c )
(1)
where g0, g1 are i.i.d samples drawn from a standard Gumbel
distribution which can be easily sampled using inverse trans-
form sampling by drawing u ∼Uniform(0, 1) and computing
g = −log(−log u). We further substitute this arg max oper-
ation, since it is not differentiable, with a Softmax reparam-
eterization trick, also known as Gumbel-Softmax trick, as:
zi,j
c
=
exp((log πi,j
c
+ gi,j
c )/τ)
P
v∈{0,1}
exp((log πi,j
v
+ gi,j
v )/τ)
(2)
where c ∈{0, 1} and τ is the temperature parameter to
control Gumbel-Softmax distribution’s smoothness, as the
temperature τ approaches 0, the Gumbel-Softmax distribution
becomes identical to the one-hot categorical distribution. As
the randomness of g is independent of π, we can now directly
optimize our gating control policy using standard gradient
descent algorithms.
Compared to the previous graph structure learning ap-
proaches, our proposed method signiﬁcantly reduces the com-
putation complexity from O(M 2) to O(1) since it requires
no dot products among high-dimensional node embeddings.
Additionally, the graph structure learning policy is able to
automatically learn the global topological connections among
all nodes, thereby avoiding the limitation of selecting only the
top-K nearest nodes as neighbors.
B. Inﬂuence Propagation via Graph Convolution
On top of the learned topological structure, the graph
convolution block aims to further model the inﬂuence propa-
gation process and update each speciﬁc node’s representation
by incorporating its neighbors’ information. Considering the
characteristics of tasks such as anomaly detection, usually,
the occurrence of abnormalities is due to a series of chain
inﬂuences caused by one or several nodes being attacked.
Therefore, it is intuitive for us to model the relationships
between upstream and downstream nodes by capturing both
temporal and spatial differences. Thus, we deﬁne our Inﬂu-
ence Propagation (IP) convolution process concerning each
speciﬁc node and its neighborhoods by applying a node-wise
symmetric aggregating operation □(e.g., add, mean, or max)
on the differences between nodes associated with all the edges
emanating from each node. The updated output of IPConv at
the i-th node is given by:
x′
i =
X
j∈N (i)
hΘ(xi||xj −xj||xj + xi)
(3)
where □is chosen as summation in our method, hΘ denotes a
neural network, i.e. MLPs (Multi-layer Perceptrons), xi ∈RT
represents the time series embedding of node i and || de-
notes the concatenation operation. We denote xj −xi as the
differences between nodes to explicitly model the inﬂuence
propagation delay from node j to i, captured by the value
difference at each timestamp of the time series embedding. We
5
Fig. 3: Visualization of hierarchical dilated convolution com-
bined with graph convolution.
also incorporate the term xi +xj with the differences to work
as a scale benchmark such that the model can learn the truly
generalized impact to the other nodes brought by anomalies
instead of extreme values. Intuitively, for any speciﬁc node
i, if one of its neighbor nodes j being attacked, node i
shall be severely affected sooner or later due to the restricted
topological relationship.
Training Strategy and Regularization. Graph convolution
based on the learned dependencies among sensors only aggre-
gates the information from nodes’ neighbors without taking
efﬁciency into account. Under the extreme circumstance that
all nodes are mutually connected, aggregating neighborhood
information adds considerable noise to each node. However,
it is preferred to form a compact sub-graph structure for
every single node, in which redundant connections are omitted
as much as possible without deteriorating the forecasting
accuracy. To this end, we propose a sparsity regularization
Ls to enhance the compactness of each node by minimizing
the log-likelihood of the probability of a connection being
established as
Ls =
X
1≤i,j≤M,i̸=j
log πi,j
1
(4)
Furthermore, to encourage better learning convergence, the
connection learning policy is initialized with all nodes con-
nected. We warm up the network weights by training with
this complete graph structure for a few epochs to provide a
good starting point for the policy learning.
C. Hierarchical Dilated Convolution
The dilated convolution [46] is widely used in sequence
modeling due to its powerful capability in extracting high-level
temporal context features by capturing sequential patterns of
time series data through standard 1D convolution ﬁlters. Set-
ting different dilation size levels can discover temporal patterns
with various ranges and handle very long sequences. However,
choosing the right kernel size is often a challenging prob-
lem for convolutional operations. Some previous approaches
adopted the widely employed inception learning strategy [47]
in computer vision which concatenates the outputs of convolu-
tional ﬁlters with different kernel sizes followed by a weighted
matrix. Unlike them, we propose a hierarchical dilated convo-
lution learning strategy combined with the graph convolution
above to fully explore the temporal context modeling process
with different sequence lengths and receptive ﬁelds by setting
multi-scale dilation sizes. Speciﬁcally, as Fig. 3 illustrates, the
bottom layer represents the multivariate time series input (for
some time t, onto which repeated dilated convolutions, with
increasing dilation rates, are applied; the ﬁlter width is again
set to equal two in the observed model). The ﬁrst level block
applies dilated convolutions with the dilation rate equal to one,
meaning that the layer applies the ﬁlter onto two adjacent
elements, x(t) and x(t+1), of the input series. The outputs
of the ﬁrst-level dilated convolutions are fed into the graph
convolution module proposed above. Then the second-level
layer applies dilated convolutions, with the rate now set to
equal two, which means that the ﬁlter is applied onto elements
x(t) and x(t+2) (notice here that the number of parameters
remains the same, but the ﬁlter width has been “widened”). By
setting multi-scale dilation sizes with a hierarchical learning
style, abundant temporal representations concerning different
temporal positions and sequence lengths can be effectively
learned.
The hierarchical dilated convolution and the graph convo-
lution together form the temporal context embedding progres-
sion where dilated convolution captures the long-term tempo-
ral dependencies while graph convolution describes the topo-
logical connection relationships between sensors (or nodes).
As a result, the ﬁnal outputs have been well represented to be
the inputs of the next forecasting procedure using Transformer
architecture.
D. More Efﬁcient Multi-branch Transformer
Transformer [27] has been widely used in sequence model-
ing due to the superior capability of multi-head attention mech-
anism in long-distance dependencies capturing. However, one
main efﬁciency bottleneck in self-attention is that the pairwise
token interaction dot-production incurs a complexity of O(n2)
with respect to sequence length. To tackle this challenge, in
this section, we ﬁrst brieﬂy review the background of some
recent development of multi-head attention mechanism and
then propose a more efﬁcient Transformer architecture based
on the innovative multi-branch attention mechanism which is
more computationally efﬁcient.
Self-attention in Transformers. The vanilla multi-head
self-attention mechanism was originally proposed by [27].
For a sequence of token representations X ∈Rn×d (with
sequence length n and dimensionality d), the self-attention
function ﬁrstly projects them into queries Q ∈Rn×dk, keys
K ∈Rn×dk and values V ∈Rn×dv, h times with different,
learned linear projections to dk, dk and dv dimensions, re-
spectively. Then a particular scaled dot-product attention was
computed to obtain the weights on the values as:
Attention(Q, K, V) = Softmax(QKT
√dk
)V
(5)
Multi-head attention allows the model to jointly attend to in-
formation from different representation subspaces at different
6
(a) Vanilla multi-branch Trans-
former.
(b) Multi-branch Transformer with
global-ﬁxed attention.
(c) Our proposed multi-branch at-
tention mechanism.
Fig. 4: Different variants of efﬁcient multi-branch attention mechanism. Right: Replacing vanilla multi-head attention with
a combination of both global-ﬁxed attention and vanilla multi-head attention and neighborhood convolution by splitting
embeddings into multiple channels.
positions. With a concatenated computing way, the ﬁnal output
of multi-head attention is as following:
MultiHead(Q, K, V) = Concat(head1, · · · , headh)W O
(6)
in which, h is the number of total heads. Each head is deﬁned
as:
headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , VW V
i )
(7)
where the projections are parameter matrices W Q
i
∈Rd×dk,
W K
i
∈Rd×dk, W V
i
∈Rd×dv and W O ∈Rhdv×d.
Global-learned Attention. Recent research [48], [49] claim
that the self-attention in Transformers can be substantially
simpliﬁed with trivial attentive patterns at training time: only
preserving adjacent and previous tokens is necessary. The adja-
cent positional information such as ”current token”, ”previous
token” and ”next token” are the key features learned across all
layers by encoder self-attention. Instead of costly learning the
trivial pattern using massive corpus with considerable compu-
tational resources, the conventional pairwise token interaction
attention could be replaced by a more computation-efﬁcient
global attention pattern. In practice, manually pre-deﬁne all
global-ﬁxed patterns is easy to implement but can barely
cover all possible situations. To generalize the global-ﬁxed
attention pattern proposed in [50], we apply a parameter matrix
S ∈Rm×m (m > n) as a learnable global compatibility
function across all training samples following the Synthesizer
[51]. Hence, each head adds m2 parameters while reducing
two projection matrices W Q and W K. The attention now has
been as following:
Attention(S, V) = Softmax(S)V
(8)
where S is a learnable matrix which can be randomly initial-
ized.
Multi-branch Architecture for Transformers. [52] has
demonstrated the effectiveness of multi-branch attention in
capturing global and local context patterns, especially under
mobile computational constraints. As Fig. 4 illustrates, this
double-branch architecture splits the original input sequences
into two pieces along the embedding channel, followed by
two attention branches: one convolution branch for extracting
information in a restricted neighborhood and one multi-head
attention branch for capturing long-distance dependencies. As
a substitute for vanilla self-attention, we apply a task-speciﬁc
alignment matrix that learns globally across all training sam-
ples where attention weights are no longer conditioned on any
input token in our architecture. By simply replacing the dot-
production with global-learned alignment as Fig. 4 shows, the
input sequences will only be projected into value matrices. A
weighted sum up of values is then calculated using this global-
learned attention. In order to explore a better trade-off between
computation efﬁciency and model performance, we propose
to combine the pairwise token interactions and global-learned
attention in terms of a branch-wise mixing strategy.
Branch-wise Mixing. For branch-wise mixing, the input
sequences are split into multiple branches along the embedding
dimension as Fig. 4 clearly describes. Different from the
original two-branch architecture, we build one more branch
for global-learned attention. Thus,
Attention = Concat(A(1), A(2))
A(1) = MultiHead(X(1))
A(2) = Global(X(2))
(9)
where X(1) ∈Rn×d1, X(2) ∈Rn×d2 and d = d1 + d2.
In our models, we only change the branch that captures
the global contexts while remaining the local pattern extractor
using either lightConv or dynamicConv [53].
Computation Analysis. Table I lists the different model
variants explored within our proposed framework. The column
|θ| refers to the total number of parameters in one self-
attention module excluding the feed-forward layer. Obviously,
compared to the original scaled dot-production, the amount of
computation of global-learned attention is directly reduced by
half in terms of Mult-Adds. Our proposed multi-branch mixing
strategy increases the amount of calculation in varying degrees
due to the mix with scaled dot-production. However, this is
a trade-off between computation complexity and model size.
More precisely, when m ≤
p
2/hd, the global attention mod-
ule is more computationally efﬁcient than the other variants.
E. Anomaly Scoring
Inspired by [54], the original multivariate time series inputs
are split into two parts: training sequences for the encoder and
label sequences for the decoder. The decoder receives long
sequence inputs, pads the target elements into zero, measures
the weighted attention composition of the feature map, and
7
TABLE I: Memory and computation analysis on different attention types.
Attention Type
|θ|
# Mult-Adds
Global/Inter
Scaled Dot-Product
4d2
O(4nd2 + 2n2d)
Inter
Global-Learned
m2h + 2d2
O(2nd2 + n2d)
Global
Branch-Wise Mixing
4d2
1 + m2h + 2d2
2
O(4nd2
1 + n2d1 + 2nd2
2 + n2d)
Both
instantly predicts output elements in a generative style. Let
the single-step prediction denote as ˆY ∈RM×n. We apply the
Mean Square Error (MSE) between the predicted outputs ˆY
and the observation Y, as the loss function to minimize:
Lmse = 1
M
n
X
t=1
||Y(t) −ˆY(t)||2
2
(10)
Similar to the loss objective, the anomalous score compares
the expected value at time t to the observed value, computing
an anomaly score via the deviation level as:
ˆy(t) =
M
X
i=1
||Y(t)
i
−ˆY(t)
i ||2
2
(11)
Finally, we label a timestamp t as an anomaly if ˆy(t) exceeds a
ﬁxed threshold. Since different approaches could be employed
to set the threshold such as extreme value theory [38], the same
anomaly detection model could result in different prediction
performance with different anomaly thresholds. Thus, we
apply a grid search on all possible anomaly thresholds to
search for the best F1-score (with notation ∗∗) and Recall
(with notation ∗) in theory and report them.
V. EXPERIMENTS
A. Datasets
We evaluate our method over a wide range of real-world
anomaly detection datasets. SWaT [55] The Secure Water
Treatment dataset is collected from a water treatment testbed
for cyber-attack investigation initially launched in May 2015.
The SWaT dataset collection process lasted for 11 days, with
the system operated 24 hours per day such that the network
trafﬁc and all the values obtained from all 51 sensors and
actuators are recorded. Due to the system working ﬂow char-
acteristics, there is a natural topological structure relationship
between all sensing nodes. After this, a total of 41 attacks
derived through an attack model considering the intent space
of a CPS were launched during the last 4 days of the 2016
SWaT data collection process. As such, the overall sequential
data is labeled according to normal and abnormal behaviors
at each timestamp. WADI [9] Water Distribution dataset is
collected from a water distribution testbed as an extension
of the SWaT testbed. It consists of a total of 16 days of
continuous operations with 14 days under regular operation
and 2 days with attack scenarios. The entire testbed contains
123 sensors and actuators. Moreover, SMAP (Soil Moisture
Active Passive satellite) and MSL (Mars Science Laboratory
rover) are two public datasets published by NASA [56]. Each
dataset has a training and a testing subset, and anomalies in
both testing subsets have been labeled [8].
Table II and III summarises the statistics of the four datasets.
In order to fair comparison with other methods, the original
data samples for SWaT and WADI are downsampled to one
measurement every 10 seconds by taking the median values
following [4].
TABLE II: Statistical summary of datasets SWaT and WADI.
Datasets
SWaT
WADI
Feature Desc.
All sensors and actuators.
# Features
51
112
# Attacks
41
15
Attack durations (mins)
2 ∼25
1.5 ∼30
Training size (normal data)
49619
120899
Testing size (data with attacks)
44931
17219
Anomaly rate (%)
12.14
5.75
TABLE III: Statistical summary of datasets SMAP and MSL.
Datasets
SMAP
MSL
Feature Desc.
Radiation, temperature,
power, etc.
# Features
25
25
Training size (normal data)
135183
58317
Testing size (data with anomalies)
427617
73729
Anomaly rate (%)
13.13
10.72
B. Experimental Setup
1) Data preprocessing: We perform a data standardization
before training to improve the robustness of our model. Data
preprocessing is applied on both training and testing set:
˜x =
x −min Xtrain
max Xtrain −min Xtrain
(12)
where max(Xtrain) and min(Xtrain) are the maximum value
and the minimum value of the training set respectively.
2) Evaluation metrics: We adopt the standard evaluation
metrics in anomaly detection tasks, namely Precision, Recall
and F1 score, to evaluate the performance of our approach, in
which:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(13)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(14)
F1 = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(15)
where TP represents the truly detected anomalies (aka. true
positives), FP stands for the falsely detected anomalies (aka.
false positives), TN represents the correctly classiﬁed normal
samples (aka. true negatives), and FN is the misclassiﬁed
normal samples (aka. false negatives). Given the fact that
8
TABLE IV: Experimental results on SWaT and WADI.
Datasets
Methods
Precision(%)
Recall(%)
F1-score
PCA
24.92
21.63
0.23
KNN
7.83
7.83
0.08
FB
10.17
10.17
0.10
AE
72.63
52.63
0.61
DAGMM
27.46
69.52
0.39
LSTM-VAE
96.24
59.91
0.74
MAD-GAN
98.97
63.74
0.77
GDN
99.35
68.12
0.81
GTA∗(ours)
74.91
96.41
0.84
GTA∗∗
94.83
88.10
0.91
SWaT
∆↑(best F1)
-4.55%
+29.33%
+12.35%
PCA
39.53
5.63
0.10
KNN
7.76
7.75
0.08
FB
8.60
8.60
0.09
AE
34.35
34.35
0.34
DAGMM
54.44
26.99
0.36
LSTM-VAE
87.79
14.45
0.25
MAD-GAN
41.44
33.92
0.37
GDN
97.50
40.19
0.57
GTA∗(ours)
74.56
90.50
0.82
GTA∗∗
83.91
83.61
0.84
WADI
∆↑(best F1)
-13.94%
+108.04%
+47.37%
Best performance in bold. Second-best with underlines.
∗represents the results chosen by best Recall.
∗∗represents the results chosen by best F1-score.
∆↑represents the percentage increase between our best F1-score
performance and the second-best method (GDN).
TABLE V: Experimental results on SMAP and MSL.
SMAP
MSL
Method
Precision(%)
Recall(%)
F1-score
Precision(%)
Recall(%)
F1-score
KitNet
77.25
83.27
0.8014
63.12
79.36
0.7031
GAN-Li
67.10
87.06
0.7579
71.02
87.06
0.7823
LSTM-VAE
85.51
63.66
0.7298
52.57
95.46
0.6780
MAD-GAN
80.49
82.14
0.8131
85.17
89.91
0.8747
R-Models
OmniAnomaly
74.16
97.76
0.8434
88.67
91.17
0.8989
LSTM-NDT
89.65
88.46
0.8905
59.44
53.74
0.5640
DAGMM
58.45
90.58
0.7105
54.12
99.34
0.7007
MTAD-GAT
89.06
91.23
0.9013
87.54
94.40
0.9084
F-Models
GTA∗∗(ours)
89.11
91.76
0.9041
91.04
91.17
0.9111
Best performance in bold. Second-best with underlines.
∗∗represents the results chosen by best F1-score.
in many real-world anomaly detection scenarios, it is more
vital for the system to detect all the real attacks or anomalies
by tolerating a few false alarms. As such, we generally give
more concern to Recall and the overall F1 score instead
of Precision. Considering different anomaly score thresholds
may result in different metric scores, we hence report both
our best Recall and F1 results (with notations
∗and
∗∗
respectively) on all datasets for a thorough comparison.
Also, we adopt the point-adjust way to calculate the perfor-
mance metrics following [13]. In practice, anomalous observa-
tions usually occur consecutively to form contiguous anomaly
segments. An alert for anomalies can be triggered within any
subset of an actual anomaly window. Thus, for any observation
in the ground truth anomaly segment, if it is detected as an
anomaly or attack, we would consider this whole anomaly
window is correctly detected and every observation point in
this segment has been classiﬁed as anomalies. The observa-
tions outside the ground truth anomaly segment are treated as
usual. In all, we ﬁrst train our model on the training set to
learn the general sequence pattern and make the forecasting
on the test set for anomaly detection.
3) Baselines: We compare our GTA with a wide range of
state-of-the-arts in multivariate time series anomaly detection,
including: (1) reconstruction-based models: PCA, AE [10],
KitNet [57], DAGMM [12], GAN-Li [20], OmniAnomaly
[13], LSTM-VAE [11], MAD-GAN [6], and (2) forecasting-
9
based models: KNN [14], FB [15], MTAD-GAT [17] and GDN
[4].
4) Training Settings: We implement our method and all its
variants using Pytorch1 version 1.7.0 with CUDA 10.1 and
Pytorch Geometric Library [58] version 1.6.3. We conduct
all experiments on four NVIDIA Tesla P100 GPUs. For time
series forecasting, we set the historical window size to 60
frames with a label series length as 30 to predict the value at
next timestamp. The number of dilated convolution levels for
temporal context modeling is set to 3. Also, the general model
input embedding dimension is set to 128. For the conventional
multi-head attention mechanism, the number of heads is set
to 8. In total, we have 3 encoder layers and 2 decoder layers
and the dimensional of fully connected network is set to 128
which is equal to the model dimension. Additionally, we apply
the dropout strategy to prevent overﬁtting with dropout rate
consistently equals to 0.05. The models are trained using the
Adam optimizer with learning rate initialized as 1e−4 and
β1, β2 as 0.9, 0.99, respectively. A learning rate adjusting
strategy is also applied. We train our models for up to 50
epochs and early stopping strategy is applied with patience of
10. We run each experiment for 5 trials and report the mean
value.
C. Experimental Results
In Table IV, we show the anomaly detection accuracy in
terms of precision, recall, and F1-score, of our proposed GTA
method and other state-of-the-arts on datasets SWaT and
WADI. Each of these baselines provides a speciﬁc threshold
selection method, and the reported F1-score is calculated
correspondingly. Our proposed GTA signiﬁcantly outperforms
all the other approaches on both datasets by achieving the
best F1-score as 0.91 for SWaT and 0.84 for WADI. As-
tonishingly, compared to the second-best model GDN, GTA
can achieve an overall 12.35% increase and an impressive
47.47% improvement in terms of the best F1-score on these
two datasets, respectively. Moreover, we have the following
observations: (1) Compared to the conventional unsupervised
approaches such as PCA, KNN, FB, deep learning-based tech-
niques (AE, LSTM-VAE, MAD-GAN, etc.) generally have a
better detection performance on both datasets. By adopting the
recurrent mechanism (RNN, GRU, LSTM) in modeling long
sequences and capturing the temporal context dependencies,
the deep learning-based methods demonstrate superiority over
the conventional methods. (2) DAGMM [12] aims to handle
multivariate data without temporal information, indicating the
input data contains only one observation instead of a historical
time series window. Hence this approach is not suitable for
temporal dependency modeling, which is crucial for multivari-
ate time series anomaly detection. (3) Most existing methods
are based on recurrent neural networks to capture tempo-
ral dependency, including both reconstruction-based models
(LSTM-VAE, OmniAnomaly, MAD-GAN) and forecasting-
based models (LSTM-NDT, MTAD-GAT). Of which, LSTM-
NDT [8] is a deterministic model without leveraging stochastic
1https://pytorch.org/
TABLE VI: Anomaly detection accuracy in terms of preci-
sion(%), recall(%), and F1-score of GTA and its variants.
Method
SWaT
WADI
Prec(%)
Rec(%)
F1-score
Prec(%)
Rec(%)
F1-score
GTA
94.83
88.10
0.91
83.91
83.61
0.84
w/o Graph
88.64
65.73
0.75
71.25
68.23
0.70
w/o LP
89.36
72.12
0.80
79.56
77.10
0.78
w/o Attn
78.75
65.34
0.71
74.75
70.90
0.73
information for modeling the inherent stochasticity of time se-
ries. LSTM-VAE [11] combines LSTM with VAE for sequence
modeling; however, it ignores the temporal dependencies
among latent variables. OmniAnomaly [13] was then proposed
to solve this problem. Additionally, MAD-GAN [6] aims to
adopt a general adversarial training fashion to reconstruct
the original time series, which also uses recurrent neural
networks. Nevertheless, the recurrent learning mechanism’s
core properties restrict the modeling process to be sequential.
Past information has to be retained through the past hidden
states, limiting the long-term sequence modeling capability
of the model. Transformer adopts a non-sequential learning
fashion, and the powerful self-attention mechanism makes the
context distance between any token of a time series shrink
to one, which is of high importance to sequence modeling
as more historical data can provide more pattern information.
(4) Though GDN [4] is also a graph learning-based anomaly
detection approach, it adopts the top-K nearest connection
strategy to model the topological graph structure among sen-
sors, which have certain limitations as we discussed in Section
I. MTAD-GAT [17] directly utilizes the initial graph structure
information by assuming all sensors are mutually connected,
making it a complete graph that is not suitable for many real-
life situations.
From Table V, we can see that the overall improvements
in terms of best F1-score on datasets SMAP and MSL are
not as impressive as Table IV shows. We argue the main
difference of results between the NASA anomaly datasets
and the Cyber-attack datasets lies in the features’ dependen-
cies. SMAP provides measurements of the land surface soil
moisture by measuring various separated attributes such as
radiation, temperature, computational activities, etc. Though
these attributes are not entirely independent of each other,
the internal relationships between them are much weaker than
those within SWaT or WADI where any slight change that
appears on one sensor can propagate to the whole network.
Therefore, our proposed graph structure learning strategy
might be more effective on datasets with a strong topological
structure.
D. Ablation Studies
To study each component of our approach’s effectiveness,
we gradually exclude the elements to observe how the model
performance degrades on datasets SWaT and WADI. First, we
study the signiﬁcance of modeling the dependencies among
sensors using graph learning. We directly apply the original
time series as the inputs for the Transformer and make the
10
(a) Partial graph structure learned by the learning policy.
(b) The attacked sensor with three other malicious sensors.
Fig. 5: A case study of showing an attack in WADI.
forecasting without graph learned phase. Second, we study
the signiﬁcance of our proposed structure learning policy
(LP) by substituting it with a static complete graph where
every node is bi-directionally linked to each other. Finally,
to study the necessity of the Transformer-based architecture
for sequence modeling, we substitute the Transformer with
a GRU-based recurrent neural network for forecasting. The
results are summarized in Table VI and provide the following
observations: (1) Our proposed learning policy helps the graph
convolution operation by capturing only proper information
ﬂow with noises ﬁltered out. (2) There is a considerable gap
between GTA and the variant without graph learning which
again demonstrates the importance of topological structure
modeling in handling multivariate time series anomaly detec-
tion. (3) Transformer-based architecture exhibits superiority
in sequence modeling, where the self-attention mechanism
plays a critical role. Moreover, these results again conﬁrm that
every component of our method is indispensable and make
this framework powerful in multivariate time series anomaly
detection.
E. Graph Learning and Case Study
By introducing a case study of an actual attack from
the Cyber-attack dataset WADI, we evaluate what a graph
structure would the graph learning policy learn and how this
helps us localize and comprehend an anomaly in this section.
An assault with a period of 25.16 minutes was logged in the
WADI data collecting log, which fraudulently turned on the
motorized valve 1 MV 001 STATUS and caused an overﬂow
on the primary tank. It’s difﬁcult for the operation engineers
to ﬁnd out the status of this valve manually because it’s still
within normal range. As a result, it’s not easy to spot this
oddity.
The water distribution treatment, for example, consists
of three-state processes from the water supply, distribution
network, and return water system, which are denoted as
P1, P2, and P3, respectively. Every sensor and actuator, in
every condition, is inextricably linked. The raw water inlet
valve that regulates the SUTD entering, for example, is
represented by 1 MV 001 STATUS. Because 1 FIT 001 PV
is a downstream ﬂow indicator transmitter of the water dis-
tribution, the value of 1 FIT 001 PV rises rapidly if the
1 MV 001 valve is turned on abruptly. As its outcome of
the ﬁrst stage propagates the inﬂuence from the raw water
transfer pump to the second stage, 2 FIT 001 PV is also
vulnerable to the same malicious attack. In addition, as
LEAK DIFF PRESSURE becomes irregular during this pro-
cedure, the leaking water pressure grows without a doubt. Our
graph learning policy learned a partial graph in Fig. 5a, which
almost properly depicts the topological interactions among
sensors. The LEAD DIFF PRESSURE is almost related to
every other displayed node as malicious information passes
from upstream sensors to downstream ones. More importantly,
Fig. 5b shows our model’s predicted sensor curves (blue lines)
against the ground truth (red lines) of sensor 1 FIT 001 PV,
2 FIT 001 PV, and 2 PIT 001 PV within the attack dura-
tion. The predictions of these sensors are consistently higher
than the ground truth, where the anomaly score increases
correspondingly. It is mainly because the input time series has
been embedded with the graph structure information through
the inﬂuence propagation convolution operation. Sensors that
are not directly attacked will still be severely affected if
sensors that are highly related to them are attacked. Therefore,
our model can capture this dependency and result in an
abnormal prediction, which is vital for the following anomaly
detection.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed GTA, a Transformer-based frame-
work for anomaly detection that uses the introduced connec-
tion learning policy to automatically learn sensor dependen-
cies. To simulate the information ﬂow among the sensors in the
graph, we devised an unique Inﬂuence Propagation (IP) graph
convolution. The inference speed of our proposed multi-branch
attention technique is greatly improved without sacriﬁcing
model performance. Extensive experiments on four real-world
datasets demonstrated that our strategy outperformed other
state-of-the-art approaches in terms of prediction accuracy. We
also provided a case study to demonstrate how our approach
identiﬁes the anomaly by utilizing our proposed techniques.
We aim to explore more about combining this approach with
the online learning strategy to land it on the mobile IoT
scenarios for future work.
11
REFERENCES
[1] M. S. Mahdavinejad, M. Rezvan, M. Barekatain, P. Adibi, P. M.
Barnaghi, and A. P. Sheth, “Machine learning for internet of things
data analysis: A survey,” CoRR, vol. abs/1802.06305, 2018.
[2] Z. Cai and Z. He, “Trading private range counting over big iot data,” in
39th IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems,
ICDCS 2019, Dallas, TX, USA, July 7-10, 2019.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 144–
153. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDCS.2019.00023
[3] M. Mohammadi, A. I. Al-Fuqaha, S. Sorour, and M. Guizani, “Deep
learning for iot big data and streaming analytics: A survey,” IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2923–2960, 2018.
[4] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
in multivariate time series,” in Proceedings of the 35th AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2021.
[5] Z. Cai and X. Zheng, “A private and efﬁcient mechanism for
data uploading in smart cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 766–775, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2018.2830307
[6] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
adversarial networks,” in 28th International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 11730.
Springer, 2019, pp. 703–716.
[7] X. Zheng and Z. Cai, “Privacy-preserved data sharing towards
multiple parties in industrial iots,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol.
38,
no.
5,
pp.
968–979,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.2020.2980802
[8] K.
Hundman,
V.
Constantinou,
C.
Laporte,
I.
Colwell,
and
T. S¨oderstr¨om, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and non-
parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining.
ACM, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[9] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: a water
distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical
systems,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Cyber-
Physical Systems for Smart Water Networks.
ACM, 2017, pp. 25–28.
[10] C. C. Aggarwal, Outlier Analysis.
Springer, 2013.
[11] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
for robot-assisted feeding using an lstm-based variational autoencoder,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1711.00614, 2017.
[12] B. Zong, Q. Song, M. R. Min, W. Cheng, C. Lumezanu, D. Cho, and
H. Chen, “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised
anomaly detection,” in 6th International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations.
OpenReview.net, 2018.
[13] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
network,” in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining.
ACM, 2019,
pp. 2828–2837.
[14] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
spaces,” in Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 6th
European Conference, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
2431.
Springer, 2002, pp. 15–26.
[15] A. Lazarevic and V. Kumar, “Feature bagging for outlier detection,”
in Proceedings of the 11th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining.
ACM, 2005, pp. 157–166.
[16] Y. Liang, Z. Cai, J. Yu, Q. Han, and Y. Li, “Deep learning based
inference of private information using embedded sensors in smart
devices,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 8–14, 2018. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/MNET.2018.1700349
[17] H. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Duan, C. Huang, D. Cao, Y. Tong, B. Xu, J. Bai,
J. Tong, and Q. Zhang, “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via
graph attention network,” in 20th IEEE International Conference on
Data Mining.
IEEE, 2020, pp. 841–850.
[18] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. C. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial
networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/1406.2661, 2014.
[19] Z.
Cai,
Z.
Xiong,
H.
Xu,
P.
Wang,
W.
Li,
and
Y.
Pan,
“Generative adversarial networks: A survey towards private and secure
applications,” CoRR, vol. abs/2106.03785, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.03785
[20] D. Li, D. Chen, J. Goh, and S. Ng, “Anomaly detection with gen-
erative adversarial networks for multivariate time series,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1809.04758, 2018.
[21] J. Zhou, G. Cui, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “Graph
neural networks: A review of methods and applications,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1812.08434, 2018.
[22] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Li`o, and
Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in 6th International Conference
on Learning Representations.
OpenReview.net, 2018.
[23] F. Wu, A. H. S. Jr., T. Zhang, C. Fifty, T. Yu, and K. Q. Weinberger,
“Simplifying graph convolutional networks,” in Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 97.
PMLR, 2019, pp. 6861–6871.
[24] Y. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Liu, S. E. Sarma, M. M. Bronstein, and J. M.
Solomon, “Dynamic graph CNN for learning on point clouds,” ACM
Trans. Graph., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 146:1–146:12, 2019.
[25] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Con-
necting the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural
networks,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining.
ACM, 2020,
pp. 753–763.
[26] D. Cao, Y. Wang, J. Duan, C. Zhang, X. Zhu, C. Huang, Y. Tong, B. Xu,
J. Bai, J. Tong, and Q. Zhang, “Spectral temporal graph neural network
for multivariate time-series forecasting,” in NeurIPS, 2020.
[27] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in NeurIPS,
2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[28] A. Bl´azquez-Garc´ıa, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A re-
view on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” CoRR, vol.
abs/2002.04236, 2020.
[29] Y. Zhang, Z. Ge, A. G. Greenberg, and M. Roughan, “Network anomog-
raphy,” in Proceedings of the 5th Internet Measurement Conference,
IMC 2005, Berkeley, California, USA, October 19-21, 2005.
USENIX
Association, 2005, pp. 317–330.
[30] W. Lu and A. A. Ghorbani, “Network anomaly detection based on
wavelet analysis,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2009, 2009.
[31] M. Munir, S. A. Siddiqui, A. Dengel, and S. Ahmed, “Deepant: A deep
learning approach for unsupervised anomaly detection in time series,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 1991–2005, 2019.
[32] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and
G. Shroff, “Lstm-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly de-
tection,” CoRR, vol. abs/1607.00148, 2016.
[33] P. Filonov, A. Lavrentyev, and A. Vorontsov, “Multivariate industrial
time series with cyber-attack simulation: Fault detection using an lstm-
based predictive data model,” CoRR, vol. abs/1612.06676, 2016.
[34] A. A. Cook, G. Misirli, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for iot time-
series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6481–
6494, 2020.
[35] M. Jones, D. Nikovski, M. Imamura, and T. Hirata, “Exemplar learning
for extremely efﬁcient anomaly detection in real-valued time series,”
Data Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 1427–1454, 2016.
[36] M. Sakurada and T. Yairi, “Anomaly detection using autoencoders with
nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” in Proceedings of the MLSDA 2014
2nd Workshop on Machine Learning for Sensory Data Analysis, Gold
Coast, Australia, QLD, Australia, December 2, 2014, A. Rahman, J. D.
Deng, and J. Li, Eds.
ACM, 2014, p. 4.
[37] H. Lu, Y. Liu, Z. Fei, and C. Guan, “An outlier detection algorithm
based on cross-correlation analysis for time series dataset,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 53 593–53 610, 2018.
[38] A. Siffer, P. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largou¨et, “Anomaly detection
in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining.
ACM, 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[39] P. Senin, J. Lin, X. Wang, T. Oates, S. Gandhi, A. P. Boedihardjo,
C. Chen, and S. Frankenstein, “Time series anomaly discovery with
grammar-based compression,” in Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on Extending Database Technology, EDBT 2015, Brussels,
Belgium, March 23-27, 2015, G. Alonso, F. Geerts, L. Popa, P. Barcel´o,
J. Teubner, M. Ugarte, J. V. den Bussche, and J. Paredaens, Eds.
OpenProceedings.org, 2015, pp. 481–492.
[40] H. N. Akouemo and R. J. Povinelli, “Data improving in time series using
arx and ann models,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 32,
no. 5, pp. 3352–3359, 2017.
[41] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural
networks on graphs with fast localized spectral ﬁltering,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016,
Barcelona, Spain, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. von Luxburg, I. Guyon,
and R. Garnett, Eds., 2016, pp. 3837–3845.
12
[42] C. J. Maddison, D. Tarlow, and T. Minka, “A* sampling,” in NeurIPS,
2014, pp. 3086–3094.
[43] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with
gumbel-softmax,” in 5th International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations.
OpenReview.net, 2017.
[44] C. Rosenbaum, T. Klinger, and M. Riemer, “Routing networks: Adaptive
selection of non-linear functions for multi-task learning,” in 6th Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations.
OpenReview.net,
2018.
[45] Y. Guo, H. Shi, A. Kumar, K. Grauman, T. Rosing, and R. S. Feris,
“Spottune: Transfer learning through adaptive ﬁne-tuning,” in IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Computer
Vision Foundation / IEEE, 2019, pp. 4805–4814.
[46] F. Yu and V. Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convo-
lutions,” in 4th International Conference on Learning Representations,
Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun, Eds., 2016.
[47] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. E. Reed, D. Anguelov,
D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with
convolutions,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition.
IEEE Computer Society, 2015, pp. 1–9.
[48] A. Raganato and J. Tiedemann, “An analysis of encoder representations
in transformer-based machine translation,” in EMNLP.
Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2018, pp. 287–297.
[49] E. Voita, R. Sennrich, and I. Titov, “The bottom-up evolution of
representations in the transformer: A study with machine translation
and language modeling objectives,” in EMNLP-IJCNLP.
Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2019, pp. 4395–4405.
[50] A. Raganato, Y. Scherrer, and J. Tiedemann, “Fixed encoder self-
attention patterns in transformer-based machine translation,” in EMNLP,
T. Cohn, Y. He, and Y. Liu, Eds.
Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2020, pp. 556–568.
[51] Y. Tay, D. Bahri, D. Metzler, D. Juan, Z. Zhao, and C. Zheng,
“Synthesizer: Rethinking self-attention in transformer models,” CoRR,
vol. abs/2005.00743, 2020.
[52] Z. Wu, Z. Liu, J. Lin, Y. Lin, and S. Han, “Lite transformer with
long-short range attention,” in 8th International Conference on Learning
Representations.
OpenReview.net, 2020.
[53] F. Wu, A. Fan, A. Baevski, Y. N. Dauphin, and M. Auli, “Pay less atten-
tion with lightweight and dynamic convolutions,” in 7th International
Conference on Learning Representations.
OpenReview.net, 2019.
[54] H. Zhou, S. Zhang, J. Peng, S. Zhang, J. Li, H. Xiong, and W. Zhang,
“Informer: Beyond efﬁcient transformer for long sequence time-series
forecasting,” CoRR, vol. abs/2012.07436, 2020.
[55] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “Swat: a water treatment testbed for
research and training on ICS security,” in 2016 International Workshop
on Cyber-physical Systems for Smart Water Networks.
IEEE Computer
Society, 2016, pp. 31–36.
[56] P. O’Neill, D. Entekhabi, E. G. Njoku, and K. H. Kellogg, “The
NASA soil moisture active passive (SMAP) mission: Overview,” in IEEE
International Geoscience & Remote Sensing Symposium.
IEEE, 2010,
pp. 3236–3239.
[57] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
25th Annual Network and Distributed System Security Symposium. The
Internet Society, 2018.
[58] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with
pytorch geometric,” CoRR, vol. abs/1903.02428, 2019.
